So now that they
gave you an overview
of what the common ForkJoinPool
is, let's take some time
to see how Java parallel
streams maps its programming
abstractions, its functional
programming abstractions,
onto the common ForkJoinPool.
And we'll see this is
kind of interesting.
It'll also give us a
chance to talk about some
of the behaviors of the
common ForkJoinPool, which
we'll outline here briefly.
But we'll go into
much more detail
in the fork-join framework
portion of this course.
So each worker thread in
the common ForkJoinPool
essentially scans for task.
It has a loop that
just continuously scans
for work to do.
And we'll talk in more detail in
a second about how many threads
there are and how
they work and so on.
But just for the
sake of argument,
let's assume that
there's three threads
in the common ForkJoinPool,
and they just sit there
and look for stuff to do.
In this particular
part of the course,
we're not going to
go into great detail
about how the common
ForkJoinPool works.
That will be covered later
in the fork-join framework
lessons.
But we're going to focus
about tasks that are associate
with parallel streams.
You don't care about any other
kind of tasks at this point.
The parallel streams tasks
are interesting enough.
Now, the whole goal
of doing things
this way is to have
the common ForkJoinPool
try to keep the
threads in the pool,
and of course the
cores that are actually
executing those threads,
as busy as possible.
We really want to
maximize performance.
So to enable this to
happen, each worker thread
has something called
a deque, which
stands for double-ended queue.
And a deque is basically
a data structure
where you can efficiently
put things on the front
and take things off the
front, and efficiently
put things on the back and
take things off the back.
As it turns out, we want to be
able to put things on the front
and take things off the front,
but we really mostly want
to take things off the back.
And so we'll talk about
front and back here.
Front and back can be
a little deceiving.
So just imagine
there are two ends,
and we want be able to add and
remove things to both ends.
And these deques are
used as the main source
of tasks for the threads in the
worker thread pool to process.
Now, not surprisingly,
what we're
going to have here is the
parallel streams framework will
automatically create
ForkJoinTasks that will then
be run by the worker threads
in the common ForkJoinPool.
And I think we've
talked before about who
creates these ForkJoinTasks--
well, or rather where
the data comes from
is actually going to be from
Spliterators that split things
up into chunks.
And then those chunks are
kind of wrapped up into tasks
that the parallel streams
framework hands off
to the comma ForkJoinPool.
So that's kind of
the control flow here
between the different layers.
There's a particular
class that's
part of the streams framework.
It's part of the
java.util.stream package.
And it's called AbstractTask.
And that's a
superclass that's used
by many of the ForkJoinTasks in
the parallel streams framework
to implement the behavior.
So AbstractTask manages
the splitting logic,
the tracking of the
child tasks, and all
the various intermediate
results that
need to take place to
process the tasks properly.
So we're just going to look at
a little snippet of the code.
You can find the code
here at this link
if you're interested
in reading more.
The code, sadly, is not
documented very thoroughly.
So it's a bit of a mystery
to try to understand it
in its entirety.
But I'll break down the key
parts that we care about.
The way of processing tasks
in the fork-join framework
is always through
something called compute.
It's a hook method that
has to be overridden.
And that's what the fork-join
framework calls back
in order to do the processing.
And this compute
method here will
decide whether to split a
task up further or compute it
directly.
So that's a very common
way in which tasks work.
They do this kind of
divide-and-conquer-like
approach.
As you can see here, we end
up creating a Spliterator.
And then we use this
Spliterator to try
to partition the input source.
So this is where the
streams framework
calls the trySplit method
on the Spliterators.
So if you have Spliterators
that are designed
to be used for
parallel streams, this
is where the trySplit
method gets called.
And as you can see, it's
being called in a loop.
So we're going to
continually keep
trying to split the Spliterator
up into smaller chunks.
And we keep doing that
until it returns null.
When it returns null,
we'll go do something else.
And I'll show you what
something else is in a minute.
So basically, every
time through this loop,
we go ahead and
have a Spliterator.
We split up the input.
And now we've got a left-hand
side and the right-hand side.
And there's a
little Boolean flag
that is used to alternate
which child is forked.
And the idea here is to
try to deal with the fact
that not all Spliterators
split evenly.
And so we're trying to avoid
always splitting things that
will be biased, will
end up splitting
in the way that will be
least productive in terms
of getting performance
to work well in parallel.
So if we were
forked right before,
we're going to set
forkRight to false.
And then we're
going to fork right.
If we had not
forked right before,
we set forkRight to true.
And then we're going to
go ahead and fork left.
So it just kind of alternates.
What happens is, as you can
see, we go ahead and make a task
to fork here, using
a makeChild factory
method for the
right-hand Spliterator
or the left-hand Spliterator.
And then we take that
task and we fork it.
And as we'll talk
about later, when
we talk in detail
about the ForkJoinPool,
forking a task
basically arranges
to execute this task in
one of the worker threads
in the ForkJoinPool.
And very specifically,
what happens
here is when you fork a
task, the calling thread
will go ahead and stick
that task onto its deque.
And then it will either run
it when it has time to run it,
or one of the other
threads in the worker pool
will steal that task and
run it in a different thread
in the pool.
But at any rate,
forking a task arranges
to have it executed
concurrently, or in parallel,
at some point in
the near future.
So we keep forking, forking,
forking, while trySplit returns
non-null.
When finally trySplit
returns null,
then we go ahead and
call this doLeaf method.
And that will typically end up
calling the forEachRemaining
method to process all the
elements sequentially.
Because at that
point, we no longer
can split things any further.
So this will go ahead and
process the elements that
are no longer able to be split
any further, because they're
down to their
atomically small sizes.
And those things will then go
and be processed sequentially
by calling forEachRemaining.
And forEachRemaining
is basically
a version of
tryAdvance that applies
things for every element
that's in the Spliterator.
We'll talk later about it.
Sometimes you have
to call tryAdvance
under certain circumstances
if you have short-circuited
operations.
But forEachRemaining
is what gets
called if you don't have
short-circuited operations.
So after the
AbstractTask.compute method
calls fork--
in other words, it's going
back to this call here--
what that does is that
task, the taskToFork object
is then pushed onto the head
of its worker thread's deque.
So as you can see here, let's
say that that fork method was
called in some worker thread.
Obviously, it's always called
in the context of some worker
thread.
Because that's how things get
executed in the ForkJoinPool.
And it goes ahead and pushes
it on to the head of the deque.
Now, the worker thread can keep
pushing things onto the deque.
But at some point,
it's done pushing,
and then the worker thread is
responsible for removing things
from the deque to process them.
And it does this by popping
things off the deque.
And so each worker thread
processes its deque
in LIFO order, which is Last
In, First Out, like a stack
of cafeteria trays.
And so it'll basically
push, push, push,
and then it'll come and pop.
And it'll always pop off the
item it most recently pushed.
And once the task is popped
from the head of the queue,
it's then run to completion.
It'll go ahead and
execute it, and which
will end up calling that
compute method, for example.
And run to completion
just means that it'll
keep running until it's done.
The reason why we push
and pop in the LIFO order
is to improve the locality
of reference and the cache
performance.
So the worker threads
always work in LIFO order
on their own decks.
And the reason is to make sure
that the item we most recently
pushed is the one to be pop.
And that's because it's most
likely got all of its state
and its instructions in the
instruction and data caches
on the processor.
So it just tends to make
things run a little faster.
In order to maximize
core utilization,
if a thread doesn't have
anything else on its deck,
it looks around.
And we'll talk how
it looks around later
when talk about the details
of the ForkJoinPool.
It looks around and steals
work, or tries to steal work,
from the tail of some
other thread's deque
which is too busy to process
that data right away.
So we always steal from
the tail of another thread,
but we push and pop
to our own deque.
And as we'll see
later when we talk
about how the fork-join
framework works in more detail,
this work-stealing model
is very essential in order
to ensure the processing takes
place very efficiently and very
scalabley, and
uses the processor
cores to their maximum
capacity, thereby
increasing overall throughput.